# How does the evolution of monogamy depend on human life history? A mathematical model.

The human species is unique among other great apes in its tendency towards social monogamy. Traditional explanations for this evolution have focused on the presence of paternal care and the needs of our offspring. However, recent research has challenged this claim, contending that male mating competition ensures that each male is faced with a tradeoff between promiscuous and monogamous strategies. The eventual outcome of such a tradeoff depends on several life history parameters, which represent the rates at which biological processes take place.

In this thesis, we determine the evolution of mating strategies under varying life history parameters, including the interbirth interval, age of menopause, and the longevity of a population. Using ODEs, numerical methods, and age-structured PDEs, we develop two-sex models of pair bonding (social monogamy) and multiple mating (promiscuity). These models enable us to determine the life history circumstances that are necessary for pair bonding to  supersede multiple mating as the optimal allocation of male reproductive effort.

Our results show that a slower rate of mating combined with shorter female fertility due to menopause and child mortality provides a sufficient evolutionary bias to enable pair bonding to dominate. On the other hand, the effect of varying the interbirth interval is more complex and suggests that prevailing anthropological explanations for the evolution of pair bonding are more nuanced than previously thought.
